---
layout: post
title: 2019 Edition
tags: [edition]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

The first edition of the International Workshop DevOps@MODELS, specifically devoted to DevOps and Model Driven Engineering, was held on September 17, 2019 in Munich, Germany, as part of the satellite events of the ACM/IEEE 22nd
International Conference on Model Driven Engineering Languages and Systems (MODELS 2019).

<!--more-->

DevOps@MODELS’19 was a full-day workshop, involving 25 participants. The program was divided in two parts: two paper presentation sessions in the morning and two discussion sessions in the afternoon on the following topics:

#### Teaching DevOps.

This session started with a series of short presentations from people currently teaching DevOps at the university level. It was followed by an open discussion, involving both the presenters and the workshop participants on the topic of teaching DevOps.

#### The role of models and MDE in DevOps

During this session we discussed different industrial use cases where models and MDE could contribute to improve DevOps. The use cases were first introduced by a short presentation and followed by an open discussion involving the workshop participants.


## Accepted Papers

  - Detecting Architectural Issues during the Continuous Integration Pipeline
    - Camilo Mendoza, Kelly Garces, Rubby Casallas and Jose Bocanegra.   
    - (IEEE Explore) (Author version) (Slides)
  - Towards Continuous Delivery for Domain Experts - Using MDE to Integrate Non-Programmers into a Software Delivery Pipeline.
    - Holger Nehls and Daniel Ratiu.
    - (IEEE Explore) (Author version) (Slides)
  - When DevOps meets Meta-Learning : A Portfolio to rule them all.
    - Benjamin Benni, Mireille Blay-Fornarino, Sébastien Mosser, Frederic Precioso and Günther Jungbluth.
    - (IEEE Explore) (Author version) (Slides)
  - Towards Model-Based Continuous Deployment of Secure IoT Systems.
    - Nicolas Ferry and Phu H. Nguyen.
    - (IEEE Explore) (Author version) (Slides)
  - A Model-Driven Engineering Framework to Support the Functional Safety Process.
    - Bart Meyers, Klaas Gadeyne, Bentley Oakes, Matthias Bernaerts, Joachim Denil and Hans Vangheluwe.
    - (IEEE Explore) (Author version) (Slides)

## Committees

### Program Committee

  - Benoit Baudry, KTH Royal Institute of Technology (Sweden)
  - Benjamin Benni, Université Côte d’Azur (France)
  - Xavier Blanc, University of Bordeaux (France
  - Evgenii Bobrov, Innopolis University (Russia)
  - Alfredo Capozucca, University of Luxembourg (Luxembourg)
  - Benoit Combemale, University of Toulouse (France)
  - Martina DeSanctis, Fondazione Bruno Kessler (Italy)
  - Nicolas Ferry, SINTEF (Norway)
  - Manuel Mazzara, Innopolis University (Russia)
  - Alberto Sillitti, Innopolis University (Russia)
  - Matthias Tichy, Ulm University (Germany)
  - Manuel Wimmer, Johannes Kepler University Linz (Austria)


### Organizers

  - Francis Bordeleau, École de Technologie Supérieure (ETS), Canada.
  - Jean-Michel Bruel, Université de Toulouse, France.
  - Jordi Cabot,  ICREA - Open University of Catalonia, Spain.
  - Juergen Dingel, Queen’s University, Canada.
  - Sébastien Mosser, Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM), Canada.
