---
layout: post
title: 2022 Edition
tags: [edition]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

The third edition of the International Workshop DevOps@MODELS devoted explicitly to DevOps and Model-Driven Engineering will be held in Montréal (Canada) on Monday 24th of October, as part of the satellite events of the ACM/IEEE 25th International Conference on Model Driven Engineering Languages and Systems (MODELS 2022).

<!--more-->

### Registration

To attend the workshop, you need to register through the [MODELS 2022 registration portal](https://conf.researchr.org/attending/models-2022/registration). Registering gives you access to DevOps@MODELS, as well as others co-located events and main conference tracks (depending on your registration).

### Program (Monday, 24/10/2022)

  - Session #1: 08:30 - 10:00
    - 08:30 - 08:40: Welcoming presentation
    - 08:40 - 09:30: Opening Keynote
    - 09:30 - 10:00: Towards continuous modelling to enable DevOps: a preliminary study with practitioners (paper)

  - Session #2: 10:30 - 12:00
    - 10:30 - 11:00: Towards Blended Modeling and Simulation of DevOps Processes: the Keptn Case Study (paper)
    - 11:00 - 11:15: Model-driven Cloud-native application life-cycle orchestration with Ketpn (abstract)
    - 11:15 - 12:00: Discussions

## Accepted Contributions

### Research Abstracts

  - Anna Reale, Giovanni Liva and Andreas Hametner: **_Model-driven Cloud-native application life-cycle orchestration with Ketpn_**
    - _DevOps practices can increase the attractiveness of MDE in two areas: (1) Validation and Verification: Industrial scenarios require a rigorous build and test of each artifact, repeatability, and accountability for each step. MDE needs to be integrated within a framework to assure, predict, and measure quality. (2) Adoption and Usage Speed: Model-Driven technologies are often based on interpreted languages and rely on reflection to a great extent, which makes them slow and resource-intensive. To improve adoption, a strong parallelization and outsourcing of computational resources through self-contained instances are needed. Based on these observations, we propose a Cloud-Native multimodel platform to enable easy adoption of MDE in an industrial context. Using Keptn, we can represent any chain of modeling tools using JSON-based events that can in turn be manipulated as models. Each model can run autonomously as a container in a K8s cluster. Every step can have manual or automated acceptance criteria based on its outputs and predefined quality thresholds. Finally, every artifact can be stored and retrieved according to a Git commit, ensuring that task runs are thus repeatable and auditable._

### Papers

  - Johan Bergelin and Antonio Cicchetti: **Towards continuous modelling to enable DevOps: a preliminary study with practitioners**
    - _Model-based methods and techniques continuously evolve to meet the increasing challenges of modern-day technical landscapes. Parallel to Model-based methods, different paradigms are similarly maturing and being integrated, and one such paradigm is DevOps. Model-based methods and DevOps are perceived to contain benefits when viewed in isolation. Recently there has been an increased interest in matching the two paradigms, with various proposals and early adoption results. However, little focus is put on the practitioners’ view. In this paper, we propose a methodology currently being integrated which aims to utilize Model-driven engineering and DevOps practices in conjunction. Further, we present an early evaluation of our proposed methodology from a practitioner perspective, employing a large and long-running student project aiming to build a solar vehicle as a case, presenting the current integration and potential future directions. Early observations from the case study indicate significant benefits for several identified project pain points, and it’s expected that more benefits will emerge when more advanced DevOps aspects are integrated with model-based methods, and the project matures._
  - Alessandro Colantoni, Luca Berardinelli, Antonio Garmendia and Jonannes Bräuer: **Towards Blended Modeling and Simulation of DevOps Processes: the Keptn Case Study**
    - _DevOps and Model Driven Engineering (MDE) provide differently skilled IT stakeholders with  methodologies and tools for organizing and automating continuous software engineering activities and using models as key engineering artifacts. JSON is a popular data format, and JSON Schema provides a general purpose schema language for JSON. This paper presents our work in progress on blended modeling and scenario simulation of continuous delivery pipelines as executable JSON-based models. For this purpose, we show a case study based on Keptn, an open source tool for DevOps automation of cloud-native applications, and its language Shipyard, a JSON-based process language for continuous delivery pipeline specification._

## Committees

### Program Committee

  - Muhammad Ali Baba, The University of Adelaide, Australia
  - Alessandra Bagnato, Softeam, France
  - Benjamin Benni, Instant System, France
  - Jean-Michel Bruel, IRIT, France
  - Alfredo Capozucca, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
  - Romina Eramo, University of L'Aquila, Italy
  - Nicolas Ferry, Université Côte d'Azur, France
  - Nicolas Hili, Université Grenoble-Alpes, France
  - Philippe Massonet, CETIC, Belgium
  - Jose Morales, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
  - Candy Pang, MacEwan University, Canada
  - Christophe Ponsard, CETIC, Beligum
  - Matthias Tichy, Ulm University, Germany
  - Manuel Wimmer, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria
  - Andreas Wortmann, University of Stuttgart, Germany
  - Hasan Yasar, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
  - Mark van den Brand, Eindhoven University of Technology, Netherlands

### Organizers

  - Francis Bordeleau, École de Technologie Supérieure (ETS), Canada.
  - Nan Messe, Université de Toulouse, France.
  - Juergen Dingel, Queen’s University, Canada.
  - Sébastien Mosser, Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM), Canada.